Building GraphRAG Python MCP tools (#368)
neo4j-graphacademy/courses: asciidoc/courses/genai-mcp-build-custom-tools-python/modules/2-database-features/lessons/2c-add-neo4j-connection/lesson.adoc

= Add Neo4j Connection
:type: challenge
:order: 2

In the previous lesson, you learned about lifespan management and how it helps you properly manage resources like database connections.

In this challenge, you will build a _Movies GraphRAG Server_ that uses lifespan management to establish and maintain a connection to a Neo4j database.

== Challenge Goals

To complete this challenge, you will:

1. Install required Python packages
2. Configure environment variables for Neo4j connection details
3. Create a lifespan function that initializes a Neo4j driver on startup
4. Update your server to use the lifespan function
5. Verify the connection works

== Step 1: Install Required Packages

> First, create a new directory for your MCP server, and use the `uv add` command to install the required packages to your project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, create a new directory for your MCP server, and use `uv` to initialize your project and install the required packages:
```

[source,bash]
----
mkdir server
cd server

> uv add mcp neo4j python-dotenv

Reviewer: ```suggestion
uv init
uv add mcp neo4j python-dotenv
```

    username = os.getenv("NEO4J_USERNAME", "neo4j")
    password = os.getenv("NEO4J_PASSWORD", "password")
    database = os.getenv("NEO4J_DATABASE", "neo4j")
    
    # Initialize driver on startup
    driver = AsyncGraphDatabase.driver(uri, auth=(username, password))
    
    try:
        # Yield context with driver
        yield AppContext(driver=driver, database=database)
    finally:
        # Close driver on shutdown
        await driver.close()
----

Then define a new `FastMCP` server instance with the name [copy]#Movies GraphRAG Server# and pass the `app_lifespan` function as the lifespan parameter.

[source,python]
.server/main.py
----
# Create server with lifespan
mcp = FastMCP("Movies GraphRAG Server", lifespan=app_lifespan)
----

== Step 4: Add a Graph Statistics Tool

Now that we have our lifespan management set up, let's create a tool to return the number of nodes and relationships in the graph.

Create a `graph_statistics` tool function that uses `ctx.request_context.lifespan_context` to access the driver and database from the lifespan context, then executes a Cypher query to count nodes and relationships:

[source,python]
.server/main.py
----

> from mcp.server.fastmcp import Context

Reviewer: the import could be moved to the top with the other imports.
